doc: Input gathering tips and tricks (#452)
foxssake/netfox: docs/netfox/tutorials/input-gathering-tips-and-tricks.md

# Input gathering tips and tricks

In the [Responsive player movement] tutorial, we've seen a basic example on how
to gather input. This tutorial will elaborate on how input gathering works
under the hood, and how that affects some common input patterns in games.

## Understanding input gathering

A brief explanation is included here, but make sure to read about the [network
tick loop] for a full understanding.

To have a shared notion of time, *netfox* provides its own time synchronization
and a *tick loop*. The *tick loop* will check how much time has passed since
the last network tick, and will run as many ticks as needed to catch up. Most
often this is a single tick every few frames, but in special cases it might

> need to run multiple ticks in a single loop.

Author: More context is better context, though I didn't want to elaborate on that here - my idea was to give the absolutely minimal description ( what the thing is, but not why or how ), and for further details, direct the reader to the network time guide. 

Maybe some extra context would make sense in the NetworkTime guide? What do you think?

> need to run multiple ticks in a single loop.

Reviewer: I think context is important where it's going to be used. Having someone read through this doc without proper context would make it harder to grasp exactly why it's done this way, and directing them to an entirely different document with more information than is needed could overwhelm them. No reason it couldn't be in both places, but I see this document as part of a starting point for people to understand the networking, whereas minimal context is more for already experienced devs.

To have input available for each tick, *RollbackSynchronizer*s record input
after every network tick.

Since multiple ticks may be ran in a single tick loop, it makes no sense to
gather input for each tick - the hardware wouldn't update, since the ticks are
run one after the other.

Instead, ticks are gathered *before* each tick loop. This explains why special

> measures need to be taken in some cases.

Author: True, but I don't see yet how that leads to your suggestion of deleting those lines.

If ticks 7, 8 and 9 get run in the same loop, it makes no sense to check inputs again - they will yield the same value, as the OS hasn't updated the input devices yet. Hence running the gather code before the loop.

And the mentioned special measure is explained later, which makes it possible to have a just pressed input on tick 7, and a held input on 8 and 9.

My intention was to shed some light on why the examples and `BaseNetInput` use the before loop signal for input gathering.

Could you please clarify / rephrase your reasoning? Thanks!

> measures need to be taken in some cases.

Reviewer: Referenced in a below comment.

Since the player needs to *hold* the buttons for movement to happen, it is
considered a *continuous* input.

Checking the inputs pressed at the point of gather works:

```gdscript
extends BaseNetInput
class_name PlayerInput

var movement: Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO

func _gather():
  movement = Vector3(
    Input.get_axis("move_west", "move_east"),
    Input.get_action_strength("move_jump"),
    Input.get_axis("move_north", "move_south")
  )
```

However, consider what happens if inputs change between two ticks. Let's
visualize one such case on a timeline:

```puml
@startuml

concise "Player Input" as P

@P
0 is Empty
1 is Up
3 is Right: Tick
4 is Up
6 is Right: Tick
```

Even though the player alternated between pressing Up and Right, only Right was
recorded as an input. This is gets worse considering that the player was
pressing Up *the majority of the time*.

The solution is to sample player input on every `_process()` frame, and average
the samples collected before each tick loop.

```gdscript
extends BaseNetInput
class_name PlayerInput

var movement: Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO

var _movement_buffer: Vector3 = Vector3.ZERO
var _movement_samples: int = 0

> func _process(_dt: float) -> void:

Author: It was my go-to callback for input checking. One argument in favor I can imagine is that since the example's point is more accurate input gathering, `_process()` is a better pick, given it can run more often - alternatively, if FPS is less than the physics rate, it doesn't result in duplicate checks.

I'm not very insistent on either though.

> considering this complexity is only really useful when TPS is lower than physics ticks?

I'm not sure I follow your point on complexity? Doing this is more complex than not, but I don't see a difference between doing this in `_process()` vs. `_physics_process()`.

> func _process(_dt: float) -> void:

Reviewer: > I'm not sure I follow your point on complexity? Doing this is more complex than not, but I don't see a difference between doing this in _process() vs. _physics_process().
The complexity between doing it in `_process()` vs `_physics_process()` would be the same, what my intent was is that this is only really useful if TPS is below physics tickrate, but I'm seeing now that that's not true, so this comment chain can be ignored.

  _movement_buffer += Vector3(
    Input.get_axis("move_west", "move_east"),
    Input.get_action_strength("move_jump"),
    Input.get_axis("move_north", "move_south")
  )
  _movement_samples += 1

func _gather() -> void:
  # Average samples
  if _movement_samples > 0:
    movement = _movement_buffer / _movement_samples
  else:
    movement = Vector3.ZERO

  # Reset buffer
  _movement_buffer = Vector3.ZERO

>   _movement_samples = 0

Reviewer: I think I was misunderstanding how `_Gather` applied its inputs for this and the comment for lines 21-26. If this doesn't cause an issue then the other comment shouldn't be an issue either.

```

This way, every known input is taken into account.

This method shines the best in cases where the network tickrate is considerably
lower than the actual FPS at which the game runs. For example, in case the
network tick loop runs at 30 ticks per second, but the game consistently runs
and renders at 60fps, or even more.

With 30tps and 60fps, we take on average two input samples per tick.

## One-off inputs

Depending on game design, there are cases where the game needs the player to
press a button to take an action. If the button is held, the action still
happens only once, as it was pressed only once. If the player needs to perform
the action multiple times, they need to press the relevant button multiple
times.

These are considered *one-off inputs*.

> Godot provides methods such as [Input.is_action_just_pressed()] to check if a
> given input was just pressed. Counterintuitively, this does not work as
> expected - let's see it on a timeline:

Reviewer: Explaining the reason why it doesn't work with netfox would be beneficial to teach readers:

```suggestion
Godot provides methods such as [Input.is_action_just_pressed()] to check if a
given input was just pressed. Unfortunately, the built in function of
[Input.is_action_just_pressed()] is hard-coded to work with physics ticks and
process ticks, but won't work with our network ticks. See the below example:
```

```puml
@startuml

concise "Player Input" as P

@P
0 is Empty
2 is Jump: Pressed
5 is Jump: Tick
```

Even though the input was pressed on frame 2, input gathering only ran on frame
5, by which time the input is *held*, not *just pressed*. This means, that the
*just pressed* check will only register if the player manages to press the
button on the exact same frame as the input gathering is running.

This can be solved by sampling the input on each `_process()`, and setting the

> corresponding variable to true:

Reviewer: Doing sticky inputs through the `_input` override may be a better practice, don't have an example to suggest though.
